README.md, before:

# LLP Combine 
An RDataframe interface to go from TTree skims to combine datacards and fits

### Build instructions
BFI - can work locally just update sample tool constructor prefix accordingly (to find your files)

BFI/BF - designed for el9 on LPC due to constraints from Combine

Local BFI builds just clone and `make`

LPC build
- Use el9 .. so `ssh -Y <username>@cmslpc-el9.fnal.gov`
- We will use the most up to date architectures etc, so your profile/rc should do this:
```
export SCRAM_ARCH=el9_amd64_gcc12
source /cvmfs/cms.cern.ch/cmsset_default.sh
source /cvmfs/cms.cern.ch/crab3/crab.sh
```
I set up the following alias that I run whenever I login and want to use this tool:
```
alias setup_combine='export SCRAM_ARCH=el9_amd64_gcc12 && cd /uscms/home/z374f439/nobackup/CMSSW_14_1_0_pre4/src/CascadesCombine/ && cmsenv'
```

The combine version is v10
https://cms-analysis.github.io/HiggsAnalysis-CombinedLimit/latest/#combine-v10-recommended-version

This combine version will use CMSSW 14 and we set it up like usual:
```
cmsrel CMSSW_14_1_0_pre4
cd CMSSW_14_1_0_pre4/src/
cmsenv
git -c advice.detachedHead=false clone --depth 1 --branch v10.2.1 https://github.com/cms-analysis/HiggsAnalysis-CombinedLimit.git HiggsAnalysis/CombinedLimit
cd HiggsAnalysis/CombinedLimit
scramv1 b clean; scramv1 b # always make a clean build
```

It may complain about gcc architecture .. we will use the el9 one because it is recommended - this is fine, ignore the message

We also will use combineHarvester for it's datacard automation API,
https://cms-analysis.github.io/CombineHarvester/

Combine harvester  also needs set up in the CMSSW src
```
git clone https://github.com/cms-analysis/CombineHarvester.git CombineHarvester
cd CombineHarvester/
git checkout v3.0.0-pre1
scram b
```

The RDataframe framework is here,
https://github.com/zflowers/CascadesCombine
Also clone this into the CMSSW src
`git clone git@github.com:zflowers/CascadesCombine.git`


When everything is cloned and scram b'd go into the LLPCombine directory and compile everything
```
make clean
make all -j 8
```

### Workflow Super TLDR;
- Setup bins in python/submitJobs.py
- call python3 python/run_combine.py to do everything
- alias to run in bkg: 
```
nohup python3 python/run_combine.py > debug_run_combine.debug 2>&1 &
```

### Workflow TLDR;
- src/main.cpp is where BFI's are set up
  - load all the necessary bkgs and signals from sample tool
  - define strings to create (cut) your signal bin
  - `BFI->ReportRegions(0)` launches the event loop
  - Write the results to a json
  - Relatively slow for the cascades analysis due to various factors (skim size, xrootd, etc.)
- src/JSON is the intermediate BFI format
  - the JSON mapping is dictionary-like BINNAME[ PROCESS[ YIELDS]]
  - the process are background or signal by name
  - the yields are a vector of 3 quantities, {base_events, weighted_events, statistical_error}
- src/BFI_condor.cpp is what is used for the CASCADES
  - runs a BFI job to create the JSON for each file in SampleTool
  - the bin name is a user defined name that maps to various cuts
  - different types of cuts are loaded in using strings
- python/createJobs.py
  - creates a condor submission script and working directory folders in condor/
  - keyed off of the bin name
  - submits all jobs for each file for a given bin
- python/submitJobs.py
  - actual user submission script
  - use this to load up your cut strings (examples inside)
  - run to make calls to createJobs for each bin
- src/flattenJSONs.cpp & src/mergeJSONs.cpp
  - helpers to merge JSON outputs from BFI_condor.cpp
  - createJobs and submitJobs automatically creates .sh scripts with relevant commands for calling mergers
  - submitJobs also places a master_merge file in the condor/ dir for a one bash call script
- src/BFmain.cpp is what sets up datacards
  - define your input json and datacard output directory here or pass with command line
  - additional systematics can be constructed in BuildFit.cpp
  - This BF design avoids shapes templates and ROOT histograms -- we do everything by hand, which is way faster
- running combine macro
  - examples to run/collect limits and significance is in macros folder

### Implementation details and expected conventions

**Expected file formats**
Each file in sample tool will have it's own dataframe, do not combine them. If it has a different cross-section (e.g. HT slice) then it needs it's own data frame because I chose to use a constant weight when propagating statistical error. Typically you might sumW2 object with a histogram but we are avoiding ROOT for the sake of performace, thus the statistical errors are calculated by hand.

**Signal file format and naming conventions**
Both BFI and BF expect signals to be 1 file per grid point with the signal name (process name) and mass information in the file name. These get parsed and passed into JSON/datacards with the common tool header `BuildFitTools.h`.

**Event loop design philosophy**
The way we calculate the amount of weighted events in  a bin is by creating the event weight branch in the dataframe and then summing the event weights in that bin. In principle SFs and corrections can be applied in the same way: just add a new branch that creates a new SF weight, multiply evtWt and SFevtwt into a new branch newEvtWt. Now the number of events in the bin will be the sum over newEvtWt branch.

**Obey RDataFrame lazy execution**
The Filters book operations (bin creation) on the dataframe but the result of that operation isn't acquired until an action on the dataframe is executed. Action happens when you dereference a result, triggering the event loop. After the event loop  the result ptrs that hold what you want to filter (or count or sum etc.) will be populated. Don't trigger multiple event loops, the run time will blow up

Commit message:

update config default and README

README.md, after:

# LLP Combine 
An RDataframe interface to go from TTree skims to combine datacards and fits

### Build instructions
BFI - can work locally just update sample tool constructor prefix accordingly (to find your files)

BFI/BF - designed for el9 on LPC due to constraints from Combine

Local BFI builds just clone and `make`

LPC build
- Use el9 .. so `ssh -Y <username>@cmslpc-el9.fnal.gov`
- We will use the most up to date architectures etc, so your profile/rc should do this:
```
export SCRAM_ARCH=el9_amd64_gcc12
source /cvmfs/cms.cern.ch/cmsset_default.sh
source /cvmfs/cms.cern.ch/crab3/crab.sh
```
I set up the following alias that I run whenever I login and want to use this tool:
```
alias setup_combine='export SCRAM_ARCH=el9_amd64_gcc12 && cd /uscms/home/z374f439/nobackup/CMSSW_14_1_0_pre4/src/CascadesCombine/ && cmsenv'
```

The combine version is v10
https://cms-analysis.github.io/HiggsAnalysis-CombinedLimit/latest/#combine-v10-recommended-version

This combine version will use CMSSW 14 and we set it up like usual:
```
cmsrel CMSSW_14_1_0_pre4
cd CMSSW_14_1_0_pre4/src/
cmsenv
git -c advice.detachedHead=false clone --depth 1 --branch v10.2.1 https://github.com/cms-analysis/HiggsAnalysis-CombinedLimit.git HiggsAnalysis/CombinedLimit
cd HiggsAnalysis/CombinedLimit
scramv1 b clean; scramv1 b # always make a clean build
```

It may complain about gcc architecture .. we will use the el9 one because it is recommended - this is fine, ignore the message

We also will use combineHarvester for it's datacard automation API,
https://cms-analysis.github.io/CombineHarvester/

Combine harvester  also needs set up in the CMSSW src
```
git clone https://github.com/cms-analysis/CombineHarvester.git CombineHarvester
cd CombineHarvester/
git checkout v3.0.0-pre1
scram b
```

The RDataframe framework is here,
https://github.com/zflowers/CascadesCombine
Also clone this repo into the CMSSW src
`git clone git@github.com:zflowers/CascadesCombine.git`

When everything is cloned and scram b'd go into the LLPCombine directory and compile everything
```
make clean
make all -j 8
```

### Workflow Super TLDR;
- Setup bins using .yaml files in config/
- call python3 python/run_combine.py to do everything
- alias to run in bkg: 
```
nohup python3 python/run_combine.py --bins-cfg config/examples.yaml > debug_run_combine.debug 2>&1 &
```

### Workflow TLDR;
- JSON is the intermediate BFI format
  - the JSON mapping is dictionary-like BINNAME[ PROCESS[ YIELDS]]
  - the process are background or signal by name
  - the yields are a vector of 3 quantities, {base_events, weighted_events, statistical_error}
- config/ .yaml files are stored here with bin definitions
  - three different types of cut strings are possible
  - square cuts directly on branches in ntuples
  - lepton based cuts on flavor, charge, etc. (see example)
  - BuildFitInput also has a few handy functions of common cuts (Cleaning cuts in PTCM, dphiCMI)
- src/BFI_condor.cpp is what is used for the CASCADES
  - runs a BFI job to create the JSON for each file in SampleTool
  - the bin name is a user defined name that maps to various cuts
  - different types of cuts are loaded in using strings
- python/createJobs.py
  - creates a condor submission script and working directory folders in condor/
  - keyed off of the bin name
  - submits all jobs for each file for a given bin
- python/submitJobs.py
  - creates condor submission scripts
  - run to make calls to createJobs for each bin
- src/flattenJSONs.cpp & src/mergeJSONs.cpp
  - helpers to merge JSON outputs from BFI_condor.cpp
  - createJobs and submitJobs automatically creates .sh scripts with relevant commands for calling mergers
  - submitJobs also places a master_merge file in the condor/ dir for a one bash call script
- src/BFmain.cpp is what sets up datacards
  - define your input json and datacard output directory here or pass with command line
  - additional systematics can be constructed in BuildFit.cpp
  - This BF design avoids shapes templates and ROOT histograms -- we do everything by hand, which is way faster
- running combine macro
  - examples to run/collect limits and significance is in macros folder

### Implementation details and expected conventions

**Expected file formats**
Each file in sample tool will have it's own dataframe, do not combine them. If it has a different cross-section (e.g. HT slice) then it needs it's own data frame because I chose to use a constant weight when propagating statistical error. Typically you might sumW2 object with a histogram but we are avoiding ROOT for the sake of performace, thus the statistical errors are calculated by hand.

**Signal file format and naming conventions**
Both BFI and BF expect signals to be 1 file per grid point with the signal name (process name) and mass information in the file name. These get parsed and passed into JSON/datacards with the common tool header `BuildFitTools.h`.

**Event loop design philosophy**
The way we calculate the amount of weighted events in  a bin is by creating the event weight branch in the dataframe and then summing the event weights in that bin. In principle SFs and corrections can be applied in the same way: just add a new branch that creates a new SF weight, multiply evtWt and SFevtwt into a new branch newEvtWt. Now the number of events in the bin will be the sum over newEvtWt branch.

**Obey RDataFrame lazy execution**
The Filters book operations (bin creation) on the dataframe but the result of that operation isn't acquired until an action on the dataframe is executed. Action happens when you dereference a result, triggering the event loop. After the event loop  the result ptrs that hold what you want to filter (or count or sum etc.) will be populated. Don't trigger multiple event loops, the run time will blow up
